=================================================================
I Slept for Fourteen Hours – the Transnational Dream of a Dépaysé 
=================================================================

“More and more people throughout the world are experiencing forms of transnationality.” 

1. Prologue
Amberton Hotel Room, Vilnius. Sunday, February 11th at 10:00pm
I’m exhausted. It’s been a long day. Four countries, two continents, and several time zones later, I’m in bed. My lids are heavy, and now my eyes are closed.

Introduction
This letter is for the “strangers”: the foreigners, the aliens, the outsiders. Those who have felt displaced in a country and society which is not their own, and those who have experienced that sense of estrangement within their own homeland. This letter was written as a response to a moment of crisis and displacement—the author’s exile in his own country—and deals with the sustainability of hope when life reconfigures itself in unexpected ways.

Part travelogue, part meditative journal, this letter describes and reflects upon events that occurred during the first day of travel to a new foreign land: an academic visit to the Vilnius Academy of Arts in Lithuania. The long flight, the first walk around town, the sense of confusion (and freedom) in a visit to an old antique shop/bookstore, are some of the incidents of this visit—which marks a turning point in the writer’s career, leading to optimistic future scenarios. A much needed fourteen-hour sleep at the hotel after the journey is used as a metaphor for imagination and recovery. With regained confidence, the designer-author makes use of visual language to respond and give form to the transnational experience, giving his perspective to the challenges and rewards of the life lived in transit.

As in a dream, the sequence of events here are not chronological. This letter uses technology as a vehicle for what Ed Finn calls “the magic of symbolic language”.  The algorithm, used on the accompanying visualizations, form a bridge between the real and the abstract. And, like our dreams, they respond to data input (our experiences) and give shape to “complex assemblages of abstractions, processes and people.” 

The visualizations are an exercise in information design, but perhaps they are not the typical data visualizations one is accustomed to read or look at. They are somewhat journalistic (there are facts and events being reported), but they also delve into the states of memory and imagination, and are therefore subject to the interference of emotions and subjective interpretation. With the support of a programming language, systems of shapes, lines, and colors, are created in different spatial arrangements to form distinct graphics. The computational language is programmed by diverse parameters from the conscious experiences (one never dreams of a place he/she hasn’t experienced). Thus the algorithms, fed with data from the events, give us a new insight into the moments of displacement. 

My visualizations are a form of infographics: visual displays created with the purpose of providing a better understanding of complex information. They enhance our cognition, revealing unknown relationships and patterns that may be hidden or just too difficult to presuppose. Hence, they are an aid that derives from the process of encoding data as visual form, heightening our mental abilities through the decoding of visuals as meaning. Visualization plays the ever-growing role of giving form to digital information, making it critical to complement and analyze current human activities. According to Isabel Meirelles, “With the omnipresent access to large amounts of data, computational techniques have become integral to the practice of visualizing data.”  

This letter seeks to bridge the gap between the abstract—a dream, or a theory—and the pragmatic with the aid of the computer and the visual language. According to Finn, technology and creative thinking can complement each other in what he calls “algorithmic reading”. While computational language is “always leaving a gap between the two in the details of implementation. The implementation gap is the most important thing we need to know, and the thing we most frequently misunderstand (…)” Furthermore, Finn emphasizes that the best to way to clarify this misunderstanding is to make use of “the critical methods of the humanities.” The algorithmic reading is, therefore, a way of enhancing the analysis of the real and the imaginary, which defines a methodology for this letter by providing “a way to contend with both the inherent complexity of computation and the ambiguity that ensues when that complexity intersects with human culture.”  This letter is my effort to manage this junction. 

It is, in a way, a re-imagined “city symphony” —an experimental documentary with the eye of technology being guided by the hand of the human spirit. This letter also draws inspiration from Tzvetan Todorov’s concept of dépaysemant (a "new, different, surprised regard to a new culture” ) and aspires to show the perspective of internal “otherness”—always unfit but constantly “becoming”—as one of constant transformation that transcends time, place, history and culture.

2. “Home is wherever I’m with you.” 
“For a long time, I would wake up startled” says Todorov at the opening of his autobiography L’Homme Dépaysé, before describing a recurrent nightmare for those who have left their birthplace: the impossibility of returning to their adoptive places, thus becoming an exile in their own homeland.  In 2015, I actually experienced this, not as a dream but as a reality. After spending twelve years in the United States, I applied for a Green Card with my wife, Isabel. I was a full-time Assistant Professor in Graphic Design at the University of Memphis, where she was finishing her History PhD. Yet, what looked like the culmination of our journey living abroad together turned out to be a rejection letter. So we packed our books, sold our car, our house, gave away our furniture, said goodbye to friends, colleagues, and, occasionally, cried. We would never get to harvest the seeds we had planted in our backyard.

I was back home but, for a long time, I just wished I would wake up. I moved back into my parent’s place, a three-bedroom apartment, feeling like an exile. It was like another recurrent adulthood nightmare: the fear of “failing and going back to the nest.” But it was also time to pick up the pieces and move on. On the first few days, I caught myself rejecting my native language, Portuguese. Dealing with denial, I used technology as some kind of a phantom limb because it offered me a refuge in a transnational reality that was transcultural and without borders. The Internet worked as a replacement drug for an identity withdrawal, recreating a space where I could still be in touch with lost neighbors, students, and friends. I could follow the news on the same streaming device I used at home in the U.S., and make long distance video-calls that allowed me to look in the eyes of my pending goodbyes.

Kobena Mercer contends that “identity only becomes an issue when it is in crisis, when something assumed to be fixed, coherent and stable is displaced by the experience of doubt and uncertainty” . In my moment of crisis in Brazil, my identity went through a phase of resistance when I tried to “strengthen and reaffirm” a local identity from my second home country, the United States, while renegading the language and issues of my birthplace (an internet-provided technological refuge). But thankfully the nightmare eventually subsided. The local culture, the familiar faces, spaces, and experiences were too rich and familiar to ignore. So I embraced myself as a hybrid, a constant alien, at home or abroad. As Kathryn Woodward notes, the phenomenon of the global diaspora, everyday more common due to economic inequality and cultural globalization, “produces identities which are shaped and located in and by different places.” I agree with her assertion that “these new identities can be both unsettled and unsettling.” 

Born of dispersed, fragmented cultures, the cultural identities formed by the experiences of migration are the main interest of this letter. They are complex and nimble mutations that reflect our fast-changing technological context. In Cultural Identity and Diaspora, Stuart Hall defines cultural identity in terms of two distinct forms of thinking. One “defines ‘cultural identity’ in terms of one, shared culture, a sort of collective ‘one true self’, hiding inside the many other, more superficial or artificially imposed ‘selves’, which people with a shared history and ancestry hold in common.” The other, however, “recognizes that, as well as the many points of similarity, there are also critical points of deep and significant difference which constitute ‘what we really are’; or rather—since history has intervened—‘what we have become.’” Therefore, “cultural identity, in this second sense, is a matter of ‘becoming’ as well as of ‘being’. It belongs to the future as much as to the past. It is not something that already exists, transcending place, time, history and culture.” 

4. Inside an Airbus, Atlanta Airport. Saturday, February 10, at 4:00pm
“Your flight to Amsterdam is full. I’ll put you on the window, ok?” The voice of the Delta Airlines attendant played in my head as I scanned the seat numbers on the airplane’s corridor. I arrived in seat A26, arranged my things, and fastened the seat belt. Once accommodated in my new safe space, I stretched my neck to look at all the passengers coming in and thought to myself, “no chance.” Only a stroke of luck would keep the chair next to me empty through this eight-hour flight. My fantasy of clumsily spreading my body over two chairs on an Airbus was crushed when my travel neighbor arrived: a bespectacled older gentleman, white hair and beard. He sits by my side carrying nothing but a stack of printed sheets and a rollerball pen. While he puts on the seat belt with some difficulty, I deviate my attention to the entertainment center menu in front of me. Only a few seconds later, there’s a rough cough, and I noticed through my peripheral field of vision that the grizzled man is leaning forward, focused, looking fixatedly through his lenses to the papers on his hand. My curiosity propels me to take a peak: the paper is filled with mathematical equations I cannot read, like a foreign language of signs that had no discernable meaning to me. The scientist, however, reads the familiar code with ease. Next to the algorithms on the paper, he scribbles notes after pauses and sighs. That red ink ritual would go on for the duration of the entire flight. We prepare for take off.

5. Somewhere over the Atlantic Ocean. Saturday, February 10, at 10:00pm
On the intercontinental flight to Amsterdam, my neighbor sitting next to me intercalates naps with moments of intense algorithm scrutiny. While he scribbles, a weird feeling of academic brotherhood takes hold of me. The Delta Airlines entertainment center plays a Werner Herzog documentary. On the first shot, we see a university campus in California (UCLA). The sequence cuts to a scene inside of a campus building, where there is an aseptic atmosphere. “The corridors look repulsive”, declares Herzog in his unmistakable cadence and accent. We are about to watch Leonard Kleinrock, one of the pioneers of the Internet, enter a room in which there is an old packet switch, a machine “so ugly on the inside, it is beautiful.”  He punches the device three times to show how this computer, built for the military, was supposed to last for many years. It is hard to deny that they did a great job. The thing looks as if it could resist the blast of an atomic bomb. But besides its impressive ugly or beautiful looks, Kleinrock’s reverence to this machine is purposeful: we are looking at the first computer that “talked” to another computer. This conversation obliterated constraints of space and the information travelled many miles away to the Stanford University campus, where another team of researchers were watching incredulous that technological milestone. Watching this moment in the documentary, I paused. Not only because computer science and human behavior would never be the same after that, but by recognizing an astounding coincidence — the fact that algorithms, like us, are travelling connectors of knowledge forging, through migration, a transcultural network that disrupts both the physical and the socially constructed space.

In our current technological stage, identities get formed not only within the spatial constraints that we inhabit but by all the virtual spaces we are able to reach through highways of moving information. In the documentary Lo and Behold: Reveries of the Connected World, Leonard Kleinrock compares the feat of data travelling to the achievements of the era of circumnavigation, putting into perspective the critical point we have reached—when the shock of sighting new lands is an omen to a period of change, even chaos, before we find consensus (and build a new set of paradigms). Joi Ito puts it well, when describing the boiling point when two revolutions, in technology and communications, are combined: “The first is Moore Law. Everything digital gets faster, cheaper, and smaller at an exponential rate. The second is the Internet.”  Information is not only mobile, like the algorithms that travel in the hands of a scientist on a plane, but techno-mobile as the data flowing through the streams of the Internet that allows you to watch this film.

7. Vilnius, Lithuania. Sunday, February 10, at 4:25pm
It had snowed in Vilnius Old Town. Sensitive to the sunlight reflected on the bright whiteness of the streets, my vision warns my senses and the smell of snow confirms it: we are not in Mexico anymore. Better get this Latin American body reprogramed to this Lithuanian weather. The accent overheard on the streets was nice to the ears, and every street sign I looked had interesting diacritics I had never seen before.  Having just finished my first meal at the hotel, the first taste of the Baltics, it felt like a good time for a stroll.

8. A walk down L. Stuokos-Guceviciaus then Sventaragio to Gedimino
I saw the Vilnius Cathedral up close for the first time, with its imposing neoclassical style surrounded by the Cathedral Square (As I later learned, that was the place where all the Grand Dukes of Lithuania were crowned.) I am at the heart of Old Town. Going up on Gedimino, the old city dresses itself as a bustling strip of famous stores and chain restaurants. The National Theater and the Opera House are here and, a mile further, the Holocaust Museum. Walking up the strip I see, behind the corporate signs boasting the flags of consumerism, beautiful old buildings. Their facades are not shiny but their skin and bones still convey so much history, even if hidden under the heavy make-up of commercial signage. I head down south on Totoriy to Dominikonu until a little sign that reads Antikvariatas catches my attention. Without speaking any Lithuanian, my best guess is that this is an antique store. The replica of a medieval knight in full armor protects its entrance—I walked right in.

9. Dominikonu Gatves Antikvariatas — Sunday, 6:00pm
Inside the little shop, the space was filled with used books and souvenirs. Everything was written in Lithuanian. They were all a mystery to me. Seriously impaired in my cognition, I could only look at the pictures and appreciate the vintage typography. My brain was lost, trying to make sense of what I was looking at. But it felt delightful—being released from the need of logical understanding had somehow made me feel free. My perception navigated a space that was much more subjective and responded to a creative and playful impulse for building imaginary connections. 

10. Signs with no discernable meaning
Like an illiterate child, I spent hours browsing books with no discernable meaning. The satisfaction of being in a place of signifiers without assigned signification is characteristic to the feeling of dépaysement. In the bookstore, I was consciously trying to organize what Amanda Loos calls the “endless web of signifiers/ieds and associations” while unconsciously tapping into random memories that fill the space “between the ego and its images.”  I have built my own semantic network in the absence of a verbal language I could understand. My mind was navigating the Lacanian spaces of the imaginary — the ideal image space, where the iconic signifiers of Pierce, or the signifieds of Saussure, take form — and the symbolic — where language finally gives order to subjects in a complex code of associations. 

This feeling of introspection, from the aimless walk around the city—which points to the myth of the flâneur, famously celebrated by Charles Baudelaire and Walter Benjamin—and the silence in the face of an unknown language, are typical occurrences in the context of dépaysement. It deals with issues of contemplation (the flâneur as a spectator of life) but can also be an act of rebellion. French author David Le Breton explains in an interview that “The moment you leave the house you find yourself involved by practical issues that show perfectly where you are supposed to go (…)”, hence the contemplative walk “implies a resistance against utilitarianism and also against rationalism (…)”  During these introspective moments, when the traveller looks at her/himself, they are reassuring their “otherness” not as point of fragility but as an act of resistance.

The perspective of “otherness”, a key concept explored by Todorov which philosopher Julia Kristeva described as being “strangers to ourselves” must be brought to relevance since it reveals one growing paradigm of our time when transcultural identity is reaching a new level due to this moment of forced displacements and techno-mobility.  Today there is palpable understanding that exile can take place in different cultural spaces that are not necessarily in different physical spaces—like my own Internet refuge. So the Internet-age generation is one that is more than ever susceptible to internal foreignness, to a seductive fascination with the other that fulfills the promise of difference and disruption. These modern fragmented identities manage to navigate between shared cultural codes of ancestry and a skeptical view of the self as one who is unsure where to place their own identity. As technology continues to challenge time and space boundaries, the cultural identity of the “stranger” and the “misfit” have become the possibility model for the post-colonial, non-hegemonic behavior that is redefining socially constructed norms.

11. The Transnational Dream
The transnational dream takes places in a context of de-territorialization. According to the book Nations Unbound: Transnational Projects, Postcolonial Predicaments and Deterritorialized Nation-States, “The term ‘transnational’ is used to signal the fluidity with which ideas, objects, capital, and people now move across borders and boundaries. Scholars of transnational culture speak in the vocabulary of postmodernism and make reference to hybridity, hyperspace, displacement, disjuncture, decentering, and diaspora.”  Transnationalism offers a perspective in which de-territorialized spatial dimension (one that has plural locations spanning across different socio-spatial units) plays a central role in how we experience our reality. 

By making it easier and faster to move across distances and borders, technology has challenged our physical relation to space. It also defies our virtual relationship with it, questioning well-established constructed notions of socio-spatial units. The authors of Transnational Spaces mention that transnationalism “encompasses all of those engaged in transnational cultures, whether as producers or consumers. It includes not just the material geographies of labour migration or the trading in transnational goods and services but also the symbolic and imaginary geographies through which we attempt to make sense of our increasingly transnational world.”  Hence abstract thinking, memories, and dreamed experiences can also inform our transnational spaces.

12. Can We Count The Electric Sheep?
After I closed my eyes and slept for fourteen hours, I had dreams were an assemblage of borderless memories with images of Brazil, United States, Mexico, and Lithuania. Right before bed, I checked the Internet and the news of growing authoritarianism and xenophobia were very disturbing. Thankfully, I don’t remember having nightmares about those issues but bad experiences can also be shaped by cybernetic journeys. Technologically enhanced realities can be poisoned by hate and programmed for extremism, affecting large social groups. Gene Youngblood sustains that “Aesthetic application of technology is the only means of achieving new consciousness to match our new environment.” Since there is a growing belief that the computer is the tool that “someday will erase the division between what we feel and what we see”  this letter understands that we must remain alert to the ways technology can influence our reality. Migration and diaspora have historically suffered from the spread of divisive ideology—fast-moving information can also bring chaos to the promise of plurality in the transnational dream.

13. A New Beginning
Nine months before this trip to Lithuania, when I arrived here in Monterrey, Mexico, I was once again a stranger. Since the beginning of my exile, there was a visceral desire of connection with Latin America. It was as if my identity needed to rekindle with a lost brotherhood, which was my Latino cultural identity. Yet, in this new foreign land, my latinidad was immediately challenged and I could barely understand the language (although, ironically, as most Brazilians I assumed I could perfectly understand and speak Spanish). So yes, there was an initial estrangement. Change is often complex and full of dilemmas. But that was also accompanied by great sense of being or, as Stuart Hall put it, of ‘becoming’. It was life lived in movement. The best feeling was to ‘be here’, and to feel welcomed after being ‘expelled’ from another place. It felt good to start anew and to join a university again. It also felt very good to be in the classroom—a place where I always feel at home, regardless of geographical markers. Like Mexico, my trip to Lithuania represented a point of transformation and recovery, and it is why I use it in this letter: it was the first time my research took me somewhere in the world that was not ‘here’, but ‘out there’.

14. Conclusion
If our dreams seem to fade during moments of crisis, there is always a possibility of redemption. Although many questions regarding the future remain, this account is my attempt at an answer.

The feeling of uprooting was the start of this reflection about the places that leave a mark on the spirit. I hope this story of transitory moments finds you well, in the place you call home or elsewhere. Even though this letter ends here, it continues through the paths of others that follow non-linear, broken lines. So, the next time you meet a stranger, do me a favor and say ‘hi’ to them for me.
